---
layout: post
author: perry
title: Python vector framework
description: Because math is for snakes
summary: Python vectors
tags: [py, sim]
date: 2021-12-15 16:12:18 -0800
---
# A Python Vector Library
### In preparation for simulation

In order to design a 6DOF simulation for vehicle testing, we
will need a Vector3 object to store 3-dimensional values.
Why 3? Think x, y, z; pitch, yaw, and roll. A 6DOF simulation
has three axes, so vector values have the same. We begin with
the class header:

```py
class Vector3:
    def __init__(self, x, y, z):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y
        self.z = z
```

But this setup is not very convenient, and also lacks any form
of type hints or guarantees. Let's spice it up a bit!

```py
@dataclass
class Vector3:
    x : float = 0
    y : float = 0
    z : float = 0

    def __init__(self, x : float = 0, y : float = 0, z : float = 0) -> None:
        self.x = float(x)
        self.y = float(y)
        self.z = float(z)
```


This class definition and constructor will take advantage of Python's
type hinting, as well as the `@dataclass` decorator, which allows linters
like pylance to report member variables of a class at dev time. The type
hints also allow type linters like mypy to scan the file and uncover
any potential mismatches, but in the absence of mypy, Python will still
accept non-float's for x, y, and z, so they must be explicitly cast.

For ease of use later on, we will also add a factory function to
generate a zero-value Vector3:

```py
@classmethod
def Zero(cls) -> Vector3:
    return cls(0, 0, 0)
```


However, at this point, we run into a *fun* problem with python's type
hinting. Types currently cannot be used for hinting until they are complete,
which means you can't say, specify that a method in Vector3 will return a 
Vector3 object. This will be changed in coming updates to Python, but it
can be worked around by simply adding the line
```py
from __future__ import annotations
```
to the imports of your project.

The `@dataclass` decorator will automatically generate `__str__` and
`__repr__` functions for us, but the format is somewhat less than desirable,
so we'll override them with our own:

```py
def __str__(self) -> str:
    return ''.join(["(", str(self.x), ",",
        str(self.y), ",", str(self.z), ")"])

def __repr__(self) -> str:
    return ''.join(["Vector3(", str(self.x), ",",
        str(self.y), ",", str(self.z), ")"])
```

And for comparisons, to allow for checking state variables and other generic
checks on Vector3 objects, we implement `__eq__` and `__ne__`:

```py
def __eq__(self, other : object) -> bool:
    if not isinstance(other, Vector3):
        return NotImplemented
    return ((self.x == other.x) and (self.y == other.y) and (self.z == other.z))

def __ne__(self, other : object) -> bool:
    if not isinstance(other, Vector3):
        return NotImplemented
    return ((self.x != other.x) or (self.y != other.y) or (self.z != other.z))
```

Python requires equality & inequality functions to accept any objects, so the
first line of comparison/inequality functions must be a type check to avoid
accessing nonexistent member variables. Returning `NotImplemented` flags the
interpreter to check the other object's type for a compatible comparison
function, and is a uniquely Pythonic concept.


More code for the vector math functions to come in pt.2 of this post!